INTRODUCTION
Any incident can have a mix of political, economic, social, environmental, and cost implications with potentially serious long-term effects. Also, more and more incidents are multiagency and/or multijurisdictional. As the Senior Official, you need to be aware of how ICS and interagency (regional) multiagency coordination systems can work to ensure cooperative response efforts.
This document attempts to acquaint Senior Officials with the National Incident Management System (NIMS), the Incident Command System (ICS), Unified Command, and your specific role within those constructs.
At the end of this document, you will find an ICS Readiness Checklist, ICS Incident Checklist, information about the After-Action Review as well as a sample Delegation of Authority letter.
Frequently Asked Questions
• How do I maintain control when an incident occurs?
As the Senior Official, you establish the overall policy, and provide guidelines on priorities, objectives, and constraints to a qualified Incident Commander. In many agencies, this is done as a matter of policy through a written delegation of authority. (Refer to sample at the end of this document.)
A delegation of authority is a statement that the authorized jurisdiction/organization official provides to make such delegations to the Incident Commander. It assigns the Incident Commander specific responsibilities and authorities. The delegation of authority typically describes priorities, expectations, constraints, and other considerations or guidelines. Many agencies require the delegating authority to provide a written delegation of authority to the Incident Commander before the Incident Commander may assume command.
• Where do I fit in the incident management process?
ICS has a well-defined hierarchy of command. After you have clearly articulated the policy you wish followed and delegated certain authorities, the Incident Commander who reports to you will have the necessary authority and guidance to manage the incident. The Incident Commander is the primary person in charge at the incident. In addition to managing the incident scene, he or she is responsible for keeping you informed and up to date on all important matters pertaining to the incident. Your continuing role is to ensure that you are informed and that your Incident Commander is functioning in a responsible manner.
• Where can I get more information about NIMS and ICS?
Located on FEMA’s Emergency Management Incident website, the ICS Resource Center houses a wealth of information that serves as guidance and reference before, during, and after an incident.
